is ruling on the situation in Gaza I'm
joined by the UN special reporter on the
occupied Palestinian territories
Francesca aloni she's joining us from
Tunis very good to have you with us and
Al Z thank you very much the
international court of justice didn't
specifically call for a ceasefire didn't
address that in in its ruling how
optimistic should people in Gaza be
after
this uh hi Rod I understand the
frustration and despair of the people in
Gaza uh who just need to see the end of
this horror the end of the hostilities
at the same time I'm quite positive on
this on this hearing and what the court
ordered because it's first of all it has
dismissed uh Israel's um request not to
consider the case it does recognize the
plausibility that what Israel is doing
uh might breach the genocide convention
constitutes the constitutes genocide
and uh and the court has precisely
referred to genocide as the denial of
existence of a people of the Palestinian
people so the recognition that what
Israel is doing amounts to this is uh is
is incredibly important because
eventually genocide the way I see it
genocide is the rather dorment Gene of
settler colonialism which is the overall
context in which the current assault
against Gaza iscribes itself and the
court has recommended a number of
measures that signify a complete uturn
uh compared to what Israel is doing it
means to uh seize killing of people
destruction of Civilian infrastructure
particularly Hospital seizing starving
the civilians in Gaza so ultimately what
the court is order ordering is that what
Israel has been doing until now is
brought to an end and it by recognizing
the plausibility of genocide the court
puts a clear obligation also reminds of
a clear obligation that members states
have to prevent genocide so in my view
um from a state responsibility
standpoint member states are called to
uh put pressure for a CIS fire because
there there is no other way to end all
these rather than a other than a
sensation of hostilities you mentioned
and I hope I I hope I'm getting this
right you mentioned earlier that you you
saw this kind of violence as part of um
I think it was settler violence might
have been the phrase that you use
correct me if I'm wrong on that but of
course that is something that we're
seeing in other parts of the occupied
territories as well in the occupied East
Jerusalem and of course in the West Bank
this ruling is focused on Gaza but where
does that leave the Palestinians in the
rest of the occupied
territories precisely precisely of
course what uh the Palestinians in Gaza
are experiencing is an unprecedented
escalation of violence that ultimately
is not new in the sense it has been uh
it has been there through and through
the decades of occupation that the
Palestinians have experienced um in the
occupied Palestinian territory and the
then the violence that the Palestinian
as a people have the Palestinians as a
people have endured uh for 75 years I
mean the fact that South
Africa brought the knba at the very
beginning of their um oral submission to
the court is so significant and it
places what is happening today in a
broader historical and still enduring
context indeed what's happening to to
the to the Palestinians in the West Bank
is is um is certainly lower in terms of
intensity um but again they are
experiencing Force
displacement uh summary
executions settler violence so it's the
overall context of the occupation which
has been a con of setler colonial
practices that is is put in question
today M this ruling is binding but it's
not enforcable by the icj just because
of the way it's structured it has to go
to the UN Security Council for any
enforcement action or support uh to take
place how do you think that this is
going to resonate with those allies of
Israel that have been supporting it
through the action it's been taking I'm
thinking obviously of the United States
particularly which has exercised its
veto on several
occasions I think that it's going to be
more difficult to to defend Israel's
stands and it's true that the United
States have often used uh their veto
power um to prevent to prevent basic
measures of justice but I think it's
going to be different for European
countries which have a clear stance on
respect for international law um so I do
expect changes but of course those who
are active in the human rights community
needs to remain um Vigilant and continue
their and continue their their action to
put pressure on their governments and I
would say not just in the west this is
something that needs to resonate as
South Africa has shown us needs to
resonate across across the world this is
a global test for international Justice
and it applies to the West as to the
rest including Arab
countries Francesca albanes we
appreciate you being with us in Al Z man
thank you very much indeed for your
time thank you